11 
 Jazz Resurgent 
 The Reinvention of the Jazz Singer 
 I’ve heard many predictions about jazz over the years. The prognosticators typically serve up grim forecasts about the genre’s inevitable decline into irrelevancy or its survival on life support as a kind of musical museum exhibit celebrating past glories. Such prophecies aren’t much fun to consider—but they haven’t been very accurate either. None of these seers has anticipated what’s actually now happening on the jazz scene, a development as delightful as it has been unexpected. Jazz has somehow rediscovered its roots as populist music, embarking on a new and unscripted dialogue with mainstream culture. To some extent, jazz has even turned into a kind of talisman for forward-looking sounds in commercial music—with the same mass-market periodicals that published obituaries for the genre just a short while ago now proclaiming its hot new status. 
 
 
 Photo by Matt Kent. 
 
 Artists as different from each other as Kamasi Washington, Esperanza Spalding, Shabaka Hutchings, and Robert Glasper have shown that they can draw on the full range of current-day song styles without losing their jazz roots, and attract a young crossover audience who are energized and excited by this give-and-take. Pop culture stars, from Kendrick Lamar to Lady Gaga, have returned the favor, seeking out ways of uplifting their own artistry by incorporating jazz ingredients into their music. In the process, the whole notion of jazz as a niche genre for snobbish insiders has gotten overturned. Jazz is showing up with increasing frequency on tourist guides, suggested as the preferred evening’s entertainment in New York or London or Tokyo or some other travel destination. And even for stay-at-homes watching movies from the comfort of their couch, a surprising number of Hollywood offerings— La La Land ,  Green Book ,  Whiplash ,  Miles Ahead ,  Born to Be Blue —have served up jazz stories and songs suitable for mainstream appeal. 
 Of course, not every jazz old-timer celebrates the music’s newfound popularity. Just as complaints could be heard in the 1980s and 1990s when the music gained wider respectability and made an alliance with academic  and nonprofit institutions, a whole litany of different grievances have been raised now that the genre has seemingly reversed course and returned to the people. But the lessons of jazz history are fairly clear by now: complaints and denunciations by entrenched insiders are almost always a sign that something important is underway. In this instance, the new discourse between jazz and popular music seems more than just a passing trend but the sign of an emerging ethos that might prove lasting and transformative. 
 How did this happen? In all fairness, jazz never completely severed its ties to popular music. Even after the jazz-rock fusion movement lost momentum in the late 1970s, giving way to a more anodyne smooth jazz sound that was often little more than mood music, a small cadre of performers still found ways of broadening their audience without diluting their artistry. But during the 1980s and 1990s, singers played the key role in keeping jazz connected to commercial music. If instrumentalists have now built on this foundation in the new millennium, the vocalists still deserve credit for keeping the channels of communication open during those long decades when many in the jazz community adopted a bunker mentality. In some instances, jazz vocalists even enjoyed hit records—going gold or platinum in ways that simply weren’t supposed to be possible in the late stages of the twentieth century. 
 Sometimes this crossover success seemed like a mere fluke, a lucky break that one could neither predict nor repeat. Take, for example, the case of Bobby McFerrin, whose 1988 song “Don’t Worry, Be Happy” rose to the top spot on the  Billboard  chart—the first  a cappella  song (in other words, all voices without instruments) in history to achieve this honor. What made this especially strange was that McFerrin had broken almost every rule of career management during his rise to fame. No one could doubt his talent—few jazz singers of any generation can match McFerrin in intonation, improvising skills, charismatic stage presence, or sheer risk-taking—but his indifference to music industry expectations was, from the start, as extreme as his vocal ability. I still remember my shock the first time I heard McFerrin in performance. He was still unknown, without any recordings to his name, and given a slot as warm-up act at a sold-out jazz concert. And here’s what he did: he stepped up to the microphone, all alone, and started improvising without any apparent structure or plan or (obviously) accompaniment—vocalizing, clapping, thumping on his chest, and doing whatever else came to mind in this stream-of-consciousness mode of music making. It seemed like this young singer was hell-bent on failure, “winging it” in a way that had almost no chance of success; yet that night he won over a skeptical audience that had  purchased tickets to hear more famous artists, enthralling them with sheer audacity and talent. As it turned out, that devil-may-care approach would serve as the model for McFerrin’s ensuing career. The things that you took for granted with other vocalists—for example, that they will sing actual lyrics or perform something that resembles a song or even bring a band to the gig—were never givens with this performer. 
 Perhaps this very willingness to break the rules was the reason for McFerrin’s 1988 hit single: it captivated listeners because it didn’t sound like anything else on the radio. But McFerrin evinced little interest in capitalizing on his growing renown after this crossover success, choosing to take a sabbatical just at the moment when he could have packed concert halls and conquered the airwaves with crowd-pleasing hits. Make no mistake, McFerrin’s voice was perfectly suited for soul or R&B or pop music. Instead, his follow-up projects encompassed an intriguing series of duet recordings, each provocative in its own way but hardly destined for the  Billboard  charts: with actor Jack Nicholson on narrative-and-voice versions of Rudyard Kipling stories; with cellist Yo-Yo Ma in renditions of classical pieces; and with Chick Corea in interpretations of traditional jazz material. None of these was targeted at the mass market—McFerrin at mid-career was more likely to conduct a symphony than release a hot single. His body of work, as it developed in subsequent years, maintained the highest standards of musicianship and creativity while avoiding allegiances to the passing fads and ideologies of jazz discourse. For this reason, he is often neglected in discussions of various trends and styles in the jazz world. He doesn’t fit easily into any of them. Yet his life-affirming humanism, his child-like curiosity in the possibilities of sound, and his refusal to be caught in the clichés of another era would be well worth emulating by others. 
 Eva Cassidy might have achieved a similar degree of crossover success, had she not died from melanoma in 1996 at the age of thirty-three. Instead, her recordings sold more than ten million copies posthumously. Cassidy thus has the rare distinction of ranking among the biggest-selling singers in a century she didn’t survive to see. She too is rarely mentioned in discussions of jazz singers—as in so many other cases, such extraordinary commercial success gets turned into a mark against her artistry, at least according to the topsy-turvy logic of purists. If Cassidy had lived longer, she could have made clearer to what degree she considered herself a jazz singer. Yet her performances of “Autumn Leaves,” “Fields of Gold,” and “Over the Rainbow” suggest that, whatever label one chooses to apply to her work, Cassidy was one of the most  emotionally astute interpretive vocalists of recent decades and very much aligned with the outreach program that has now come to the forefront of the jazz world. Fans, for their part, have been unequivocal in their advocacy of this singer, who, both in her mastery of chiaroscuro shades of phrasing and marked ability to make old songs sound newly minted, reveals her linkages back to Billie Holiday and other jazz divas who lived constrained lives that seemed paradoxically to enlarge the emotional dimensions of their music. 
 But the biggest crossover success of this period was achieved by Norah Jones, whose 2002 debut album  Come Away with Me  sold a staggering twenty-five million copies. For a time, fan fever for this music, and especially for Jones’s hit single “Don’t Know Why,” ran so high that this one artist accounted for more than half of the jazz compact discs sold in many retail outlets. As might be expected, critics and insiders, made uneasy by this disproportionate success compared with everything else in the art form, tried to disavow any affiliation between jazz and Norah Jones. But one needed merely to hear her version of “Nearness of You” on this album, or her acute phrasing on the original compositions that have been her most popular numbers, to realize that Jones was not just one of the biggest-selling artists of her day but also one of the most talented. Unlike McFerrin, she deliberately tried to use her success to become a pop culture star, and this led Jones to work in a number of genres and settings, yet it’s clear that her strongest work is in the jazz or jazz-pop vein that first brought her acclaim. 
 Much of the “action” here could be missed by a fan not sensitive to the subtle microtonal shifts in the melody line that create the potent overall effect. With Jones it is tempting to link this gift to her father, Ravi Shankar, who was a master of the same types of effects on the sitar and helped introduce Indian music to many in the West. But Jones, who was born in Brooklyn in 1979 and raised in Texas, also incorporates a gentle country twang to her singing, and includes Willie Nelson, alongside Billie Holiday and Bill Evans, when listing mentors and influences. Jones’s greatest impact on the genre, however, may be less in the specifics of her interpretations than in her blending of the jazz vocal tradition with the ethos of the singer-songwriter, especially its emphasis on promoting new material and its tone of intimate self-expression. In the aftermath of the success of  Come Away with Me , a host of new young jazz singers with original songs arrived at the doors of record labels. Much of this music has proven ephemeral and undistinguished, but this collective decision by singers and industry execs to move beyond the repetition of Tin Pan Alley favorites and consider a broader range of contemporary jazz attitudes  has been a healthy development for the art form, anticipating much of what’s happening currently in the idiom. 
 Diana Krall, in contrast, showed that a jazz singer could attract a sizable following while still performing the standard repertoire of decades past. Born in British Columbia in 1964, Krall is an adroit pianist as well as a star vocalist, and her early recordings often reminded listeners of another singing keyboardist, Nat King Cole. As her work evolved, Krall found her sweet spot in moody ballads and gentle bossa novas, and though she drew her repertoire from the most familiar standards, songs that jazz fans have heard countless times, this artist made them feel as raw as a lover’s heartache. Krall is at her best when she is most emotionally exposed, and few jazz singers are more skilled at turning the old tunes into plausible modern-day testimonies. Sometimes she brings down the tempo below forty beats per minute, a pace at which most vocalists would require a lifeline from the rhythm section to survive from bar to bar, but for Krall these slo-mo renditions give her access to new dimensions of old songs, aspects of George Gershwin or Cole Porter that are both true to the original impetus of the composition at hand yet also make them sound like sung autobiographies created on the spot by our tell-all singer. Krall’s talent turned her into a celebrated jazz diva—and her marriage to Elvis Costello boosted her fame further to a paparazzi level of notoriety—yet her popularity is less due to these trappings of grandeur than to a confessional tone to her music that, if anything, lessens the distance between the vocalist and her listeners. 
 As these examples make clear, jazz singing in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries had lost none of its appeal for mainstream audiences. A survey of other leading vocalists of the new millennium displays the wide range of jazz stylings that can participate in this outreach program. Jamie Cullum struts and prances on the stage and does handstands on the piano, when he is not delivering scintillating versions of both familiar old songs and clever new ones of his own invention. When he hit the scene, audiences had a hard time figuring out what to make of this high-energy performer, who looked like a strange cross between a punk hooligan and the boy next door, but that didn’t stop his  Twentysomething  album from selling three million copies. Kurt Elling has kept the bohemian spirit of the Beat Generation alive with his forceful onstage personality, spirited delivery, and smart arrangements of material—performances that are clearly rooted in the jazz tradition yet sound both totally modern and timelessly metaphysical. Gregory Porter is only four years younger than Elling, yet you might think he  comes from a whole different generation and tradition, judging by his radio-friendly R&B-inflected delivery and soulful baritone voice. He too has found a sizable audience that cuts across traditional genre boundaries. On the other extreme, Patricia Barber can deconstruct songs as if they were postmodern literary texts, and write unconventional new material that sometimes seems almost surreal in its surprises. Her live recording in Paris starts with her singing: “Did you ever think a piano could fall on your head,” and one would have loved to watch the French audience try to do real-time translations of her outré lyrics. Her music defies easy categorization, and is all the more worth hearing for its freedom from the conventional and prosaic. Roberta Gambarini and Jane Monheit, in contrast, are so deeply embedded in the tradition that one might think a time machine has transported them from the 1950s jazz scene and placed them smack dab in the middle of your local nightclub. Yet when it comes to retro, they can hardly match Michael Bublé, Matt Dusk, and Peter Cincotti, who channel Frank Sinatra as filtered through Harry Connick Jr.—sometimes without much real jazz sensibility in their music, but capturing a Rat Pack stage presence that taps into an apparently subliminal desire among audiences to revisit the glamour of the old days. 
 The single biggest challenge facing jazz singers in recent years has been the seemingly paradoxical demands involved in drawing on the energy and power of the jazz tradition without turning into a nostalgia act. How can you master the music’s powerful heritage without getting overwhelmed by it? No vocalist has done a better job of this, in recent years, than Cécile McLorin Salvant, whose victory in the 2010 Thelonious Monk International Jazz Competition turned her, almost overnight, from an unknown American singer living in France into a high-profile jazz star. In short order, she conquered everything in sight, taking top spot in four categories of the  Downbeat  poll, including rising star and album of the year, and earning multiple Grammy Awards before her thirtieth birthday. Her appeal cut across traditional boundaries that divide audiences, whether generational or attitudinal, and even listeners with little previous exposure to jazz seem to respond with enthusiasm to her artistry. 
 Yet there’s a bit of a mystery to this—at least at first glance. Salvant adopts none of the familiar crossover strategies. She doesn’t try to assimilate trendy sounds and styles, and by all appearances pays little or no attention to what others are doing to ramp up their YouTube views and playlist placements. In fact, she cussedly takes the opposite tack. Her albums are filled with the most unexpected building blocks, none of them suited for prime time: old  Haitian poetry, forgotten blues tunes, bits of opera, pop songs from your grandparents’ (or great-grandparents’) day, vaudeville material, folklore, and connections back to a hodgepodge of non-jazz influences that span everything from Noël Coward to Langston Hughes. But the range of sources is far less interesting than what Salvant does with them. Somehow, against all the odds, she makes everything old seem absolutely relevant in the moment, in an updating that requires nothing more high tech than her interpretive skills on the bandstand. She can take a painfully awkward song such as “Wives and Lovers,” a paean to female submissiveness that was a hit back in 1963, and turn it into an up-to-date critique of romantic expectations—and pulls this off without changing a single word, merely through tone, inflection, and force of personality. She does the same with “You Bring Out the Savage in Me,” a mishmash of ugly stereotypes from the 1930s, that somehow morphs into a triumphant anthem of unapologetic womanhood when delivered by Salvant. There’s not much unique in the music world, despite all claims to the contrary, but this is a way of singing jazz that no one else seems capable of pulling off, at least not at this level of mastery. A close listener can detect more conventional jazz and blues influences in Salvant’s work, and link her work back to Betty Carter, Bessie Smith, and other divas of days past, but the total package is something too original to reduce to its inspiring sources. In a peculiar sort of way, she represents a break with the past, even when she appears to rely on it at every turn. 
 At the other extreme, singer and instrumentalist Jacob Collier has demonstrated that a technology-driven approach to jazz vocals can reinvent old songs in equally unexpected ways. While still a teenager, Collier achieved global acclaim via a series of dazzling self-produced YouTube performances that featured the young artist as a formidable one-man band via overdubbing and split-screen video. Sometimes these videos showcased elaborate  a cappella  arrangements, with Collier singing six separate parts, but in other instances he added piano, bass, and percussion—once again, playing everything himself. In extreme cases, the video would subdivide into a dozen or more split screen feeds, each presenting a separate ingredient in these multilayered renditions. The songs themselves were often familiar pop fare, from Stevie Wonder or Broadway musicals, but the term “cover version” hardly does justice to such futuristic reinterpretations. Yet it would be easy to get caught up in the technology and lose sight of the powerful musical imagination at work here. Collier’s grasp of the inner workings of various genres, from doo-wop to bebop, is impressive, and his skill at reharmonization  unsurpassed. He somehow found a way to reach a mass-market audience, racking up millions of online views, yet he also stirred up enthusiasm in niche jazz communities that tend to pay little attention to YouTube sensations. In fact, there’s a whole cadre of Collier followers who are primarily interested in his harmonic concepts, not his video pyrotechnics. 
 In an earlier day, Collier would have needed a record deal before achieving this renown, but in his case, he didn’t release a commercial album until 2016—five full years after he first started building up a fan base online. Published accounts tell of Collier getting “discovered” by jazz-pop producer Quincy Jones, who soon took charge as steward of the young artist’s career, but it’s some indication of the topsy-turvy nature of jazz in the current day that a large global audience knew about Collier long before this music industry honcho made his discovery. But even after years of exposure, it’s still hard to pin down this artist. At times Collier seems almost more like an experimental scientist than a jazz performer—as demonstrated by his partnerships with MIT and various technology providers. His ongoing work knows no limits, and draws on everything from 3D video loops to interactive web-driven composition strategies. Even so, a jazz sensibility is evident at every step, and seems to serve as the main impetus pushing Collier forward into new territory. And why not? The jazz idiom has always benefited from a devil-may-care willingness to take chances with the tools at hand—and there’s no reason why that attitude should apply to trumpets and saxophones, and not to web platforms and software. 
 As the career trajectory of Jacob Collier makes clear, record labels are now struggling to maintain their control over a field where they once served as powerful gatekeepers and tastemakers. In many instances, they seem to be holding back the jazz vocal tradition rather than ushering it into the future. A huge percentage of the new albums they launch on the marketplace are carefully studied retro affairs, fed on nostalgia and an implicit assumption that the best young singers are those with the closest mimicry of old school attitudes and repertoire. These efforts do little to enliven the art form, but have contributed to a view, among some in the general public, that jazz is an  old-fashioned  kind of music. But even more egregious are shallow attempts to repackage jazz as a glitzy glamour-fed lifestyle product—an unpromising recipe for a genre whose best practitioners have typically resisted slick image-driven formulas. When I undertook an in-depth study of how jazz singers get record deals with major labels in the new millennium, I was forced to the unhappy conclusion that the foremost requirement was to look like a fashion  model. The promotion of glamour is hardly a new development in jazz, but rarely has it played as significant a role as it has in recent years—especially in the minds of record producers at legacy labels. If you are ready-made for a photo spread in  Vogue  or  GQ , the gatekeepers are much more inclined to open those gates. 
 Even so, I’m not sure whether getting into this particular gated community brings with it the advantages and status it once conveyed. Indeed, the recent revitalization of jazz in other communities, both virtual and real-life, has been instigated by edgier talent operating by very different rules, while nostalgia acts with beautiful publicity photos have been left on the sidelines. In this environment, record labels and other jazz organizations too vested in a retro sensibility or superficial marketing angles are likely to be left behind as well, and not just because technology is changing in music, but sounds and attitudes as well. 
 The People’s Music 
 It’s hard to pinpoint the moment a trend reverses. And in the case of jazz, it sometimes seemed as if its alleged downturn would never end—at least judging by the pessimistic media pronouncements on the art form made during the early years of the twenty-first century. Jazz’s problem, they declared, wasn’t like a bad haircut, something you could grow out of, or an embarrassing tattoo that a laser might zap away, but more like a death sentence. I still recall my dismay when  The Atlantic  entitled an otherwise favorable review of one of my books with the dispiriting headline: “The End of Jazz,” and followed it up with a subhead that promised to explain “how America’s most vibrant music became a relic.” I was miffed, but I could hardly blame the author. He was simply stating the consensus view among opinion leaders. 1 
 That was back in 2012, but the notion that jazz was dead had been bouncing around for quite some time. In 2007,  Esquire  had written a similar article, proclaiming in its headline not only the “Death of Jazz,” but adding that the genre had been in decline since John Coltrane’s demise forty years earlier. Around that same time, critic Marc Myers published an article on his  JazzWax  website entitled “Who Killed Jazz and When?,” which reached a similar conclusion, but pinpointed an even earlier cause of decline—specifically, the decision by jazz bands in the late 1940s to stop playing for  dancers. When CNN tackled the same matter, in an article entitled “When Jazz Stopped Being Cool,” the guilty parties were now the Beatles and rock-and-roll. Other pundits focused on different root causes for the music’s obsolescence, with everyone from elitist fans to narcissistic performers getting a share of the blame. But the final result was, as they saw it, hardly open to debate: jazz had been on life support for too long, and it was time to put the dear old thing out of its misery. 2 
 It’s now been several years since I’ve seen any of those anguished obituaries for jazz, and instead a different kind of news story has taken its place. Big font headlines now proclaim “the new jazz age” or the “new jazz resurgence” or the arrival of a “new groove” that is “bringing jazz back to the people.” In many cases, the very same periodicals that had buried jazz only a short while before have become the most vociferous in announcing its rebirth. Even given the short memory span of pop culture media this is a remarkable turnaround. And it raises the obvious question: how did a hundred-year-old genre get its groove back? 3 
 In a strange twist, many of the leading indicators of this shift were first evident outside the jazz world. Just two days before his death in January 2016, David Bowie released his final recording  Blackstar , a project that featured the rock star surrounded by jazz musicians—the music was dense and challenging, yet it would later be picked by many critics as the best album of the year. Around that same time, Lady Gaga embarked on an unexpected partnership with Tony Bennett, almost exactly sixty years older than her, which found the pop star replacing her contemporary sound with old jazz standards. This hardly seemed like a promising commercial venture, yet the resulting album  Cheek to Cheek  debuted at the top of the Billboard chart, and earned a Grammy for both artists. Just a few weeks later, Bob Dylan released an album of jazz-oriented songs associated with Frank Sinatra, and not long after Prince embarked on a downsized “piano and microphone” tour that featured the more jazz-oriented side of his musical personality. Hip-hop artists were moving in the same direction, and none with more influence than Kendrick Lamar, who enlisted the services of rising jazz star Kamasi Washington on  To Pimp a Butterfly , which would earn eleven Grammy nominations, the most ever for a rap musician. Against all odds, jazz was returning to pop culture—not as a marketing gimmick but as part of an attitudinal shift led by the leading commercial stars of the day. 
 For the most part, you wouldn’t have heard any of this music on jazz radio stations. In fact, much of this music has only a loose connection to jazz, as it  is usually played. But that merely emphasizes the larger significance of these developments—namely that pop culture icons were turning to jazz,  not  because they wanted to become jazz artists, but due rather to a growing sense that this hundred-year-old idiom could serve as a kind of touchstone for musical excellence and artisan skill. After decades of marginalization, jazz had emerged on the other side. Instead of disappearing, or surviving in the shadows as an esoteric practice or dusty museum exhibit, it was reemerging as something vital, even essential. This surprisingly robust centenarian had something important to offer, whether you viewed it as a potent symbol, or as a kind of inspiring ethos for creativity, or more pragmatically as a deep craft built on invaluable tools and techniques. Even if you were a rock-and-roller, a hip-hopper, a pop star, you could draw on it to get to places you might not be able to reach on your own. 
 It’s hardly a coincidence that jazz started showing up in so many other places in popular culture around this same time. Jazz fans often expressed their reservations about Hollywood’s newfound fascination with their art form, as demonstrated in films such as  La La Land ,  Whiplash ,  Miles Ahead ,  Born to Blue ,  Nina , and  Bessie —all released between 2014 and 2016. But even an outsider with little grasp of the genre couldn’t miss the way jazz was getting employed in these films as a talisman for creativity, or even what we might call genius. You could make the cynical observation that pop culture was falling in love with jazz for the simple reason that this music had resisted so many of the compromises and formulas that were embodied in pop culture itself. Perhaps a better way of expressing matters would be to say that jazz, by its very endurance, was now seen as a kind of anchor, offering a solidity that something merely trendy or fashionable could never match. 
 This provides a useful context for viewing the expanding dialogue between jazz and commercial music that has now moved to the forefront of the genre. And no figure demonstrates this new state of affairs with more forcefulness than saxophonist Kamasi Washington. In an era when many jazz festivals felt they needed to book rock and pop artists in order to generate ticket sales, Washington reversed the trend. Rock festivals started turning to him to energize audiences with his high-voltage jazz music. With brash confidence, he brought the saxophone into the heart of pop culture—taking the stage at Coachella, Lollapalooza, and other places where horn players rarely get invited—and somehow triumphing against all odds. “No one else in popular music is doing what Kamasi Washington is doing,” hip-hop music critic Matt Fink remarked. “No musician is able to draw together hip-hop fans who  know him from his work with Kendrick Lamar, indie rock Millennials and Gen Xers who know him from the glowing reviews he gets in nearly every significant music publication, and traditional jazz fans who recognize him as the latest in a continuum spanning the whole history of the genre.” 4 
 This success isn’t entirely unexpected. The Afrofuturist vibe and trance-inducing properties of a Kamasi Washington performance offer a fresh take on jazz improvisation, one that is ready-made for youth culture. Yet, from another perspective, few jazz artists of Kamasi’s generation seem less suited for crossover acclaim. At the time of his “overnight success” (as many saw it), Washington was already in his mid-thirties, a long veteran of the fringe jazz scene in Los Angeles, where he was born in 1981. His first recordings were self-produced leader dates that sold few copies, supplemented by accompanist gigs on a dozen or so little-known albums in various genres. Even on his breakout record,  The Epic  (2015), Washington avoided all the obvious commercial formulas, instead serving up a formidably intense musical experience that few would have considered hit material. 
 Almost everything about  The Epic  could be described as excessive. Let’s start with the line-up of musicians: for this project, Washington put together a thirty-two-piece orchestra, a twenty-member choir, and a ten-person jazz ensemble. The resulting album—173 minutes of music—filled up three compact discs. But that was only a small taste of what had gone into this aptly named endeavor. During the course of the sessions that produced  The Epic , Washington and associates recorded 190 tracks—requiring two terabytes of digital storage—and if he had issued all of them, the project would have required eight full albums. Yet these raw numbers hardly capture the ambitions of the music itself, which is hot and heavy and unrelenting. If Washington had been aiming at crossover success, he could have hardly picked a less likely vehicle to achieve it. The opening tracks of  The Epic  are each longer than twelve minutes, making them unlikely choices for radio disk jockeys and playlist curators. And though the music makes occasional gestures in the direction of pop and R&B, most of it has stronger ties to the titanic tenor sax performances of John Coltrane, and the pan-African stylings of West Coast jazz veterans pianist Horace Tapscott and horn player John Carter, who helped lay the groundwork for the vibrant quasi-underground Los Angeles jazz scene where Washington came of age. By any measure, this was challenging music, and if it resonated with non-jazz listeners it was due  not  to any compromises that went into its construction, but rather to the bandleader’s fervor and authority as a shamanic performer who could  bring audiences with him on a magical, otherworldly journey to places no pop band could reach. 
 Washington was part of a generational shift in West Coast jazz built on a disdain for traditional music genre boundaries and a willingness to take chances on a large scale. Flying Lotus, born as Steven Ellison in Los Angeles in 1983, has deep jazz roots both in his family (he is grand-nephew of Alice Coltrane) and formative experiences studying saxophone and keyboard. But his early career moves involved everything from interning at hip-hop label Stones Throw Records to composing soundtrack music for the Cartoon Network. In 2008 he founded the Brainfeeder label, which would serve as the launching pad for a host of rising talents leading the dialogue between jazz and commercial music styles. The label’s releases have included defining projects of a new style that often resisted definition, encompassing Washington’s  The Epic ; Flying Lotus’s  You’re Dead ; bassist Thundercat’s soul jazz project  Drunk ;  Early Riser  from singer and multi-instrumentalist Taylor McFerrin (son of Bobby McFerrin); and the ethereal  Endless Planets  by keyboard prodigy Austin Peralta, who died from a combination of pneumonia, alcohol, and drugs at age twenty-two only a few months after its release. These artists covered a huge amount of musical territory, but shared a willingness to undermine conventional notions of what constitutes jazz, and a determination to shake up the worlds of R&B and hip-hop with ingredients drawn from African American masters of improvisation of the preceding two generations. This represents not so much a new jazz style—although it can be viewed from that prism—but rather an insurgency designed to redefine the terms of engagement for all commercial music in the current day. 
 Few artists have been more outspoken in promoting this cross-genre dialogue than pianist Robert Glasper. “You’re gonna kill the music if you only support people who are dead,” he announced in a 2018 Instagram video message targeted at the so-called jazz police—the traditionalists in the idiom who, in his view, don’t recognize that the music “always changes. It keeps moving, it’s never the same.” Around this same time, Glasper offered up an even more strident critique of jazz culture in an interview with NPR. “I try to incorporate more genres of music,” he explained. Then added: “Because jazz is not a thriving genre of music, you know. There are, like, ten jazz radio stations in the world, and they all play music from before 1970. So there’s nothing connecting young people to the music at all. Literally, nothing connecting them.” 5  The facts here are exaggerated—in fact there are hundreds of radio stations that play jazz, via the traditional airwaves, satellite  broadcasting, and online streaming, in addition to countless other playlists, platforms, and podcasts supporting the genre round-the-clock. And many of them are found on college campuses, drawing on the enthusiasm of the very young listeners Glasper has accused of abandoning the idiom. But few can dispute his view that vibrant art forms don’t stay the same decade after decade. And it’s worth noting that Glasper’s fervent advocacy of new sounds is itself deeply rooted in the jazz tradition. For almost a century, jazz artists have employed heated rhetoric of this same sort to advance emerging agendas in the music. The tradition can’t be all bad if it has always found room for these destabilizing sounds, no? Even so, Glasper’s verdict that this dialogue with pop culture has created a divide among fans is indisputable. Even as he and other like-minded improvisers search for a meeting ground between old and new, more skeptical listeners wonder whether the jazz elements are getting lost in music that is driven mostly by commercial formulas. 
 Glasper’s most persuasive advocacy comes via his performances rather than his pronouncements. Born in Houston in 1978, Glasper started out as a champion of the same straight-ahead jazz styles he later called into question. On his first album for the Blue Note label,  Canvas  (2005), he operated almost entirely within the confines of the post-bop acoustic jazz piano idiom, showcasing a rich harmonic palette and delicate touch at the instrument. But in subsequent projects, Glasper would try his hand at almost every conceivable method of updating the jazz tradition—or, on occasion, moving outside of its purview. On his follow-up album,  In My Element  (2007), he began to incorporate, in small doses, danceable beats and samples, and served up an impressive mash-up of Herbie Hancock’s jazz composition “Maiden Voyage” with “Everything in Its Right Place” by the rock band Radiohead. But this was merely the prelude for the wide-ranging efforts of the next decade. During this period, Glasper expanded his arsenal with electric keyboards and other plugged-in instruments, and would increasingly rely on vocalists, rappers, laptop effects, and other ingredients drawn from the dominant commercial genres. And even when he turned to familiar material, he adapted it in forward-looking ways. He remixed Miles Davis’s music, turning “Blue in Green” from  Kind of Blue  into a platform for contemporary hip-hop. He took the familiar jazz song “Afro Blue,” which John Coltrane had used as a vehicle for avant-garde saxophone pyrotechnics back in 1963, and reconfigured it into a mellow R&B ballad with the help of vocalist Erykah Badu. He delved into grunge rock with an updating of Nirvana’s “Smells Like Teen Spirit,” simultaneously adding an old-school reharmonization and a new-school  processed vocal. In other instances, he veered into soul or funk or chillout sounds. 
 In his two crossover albums  Black Radio  (2012)  and Black Radio 2  (2013), Glasper seemed determined to blend all of these elements together into a new hybrid sound, drawing on an impressive cast of guest artists that spanned the range from Norah Jones to Snoop Dogg. The music itself was clearly designed with mass-market airplay in mind, juxtaposing various tracks of around four-minute duration built on sweet melodies, appealing lyrics, and lightly grooving beats. These projects were a creative success, although some might question whether they could still be classified as jazz. Despite its name,  Black Radio  got little airplay on traditional jazz radio stations, and when it earned Glasper his first Grammy, the award was for best R&B album of the year. Yet this difficulty in categorization is in many ways an inescapable aspect of jazz in the twenty-first century, and Glasper would hardly be the first artist to push the music into new territories only to find others arguing over how to define their boundary lines. 
 Bassist Esperanza Spalding, born in Portland, Oregon, in 1984, has pursued a similar outreach program but in a more personalized way, albeit with results just as impressive. When Spalding wants to add a pop flavor to her tracks, she typically writes her own lyrics and sings them herself, only rarely enlisting the assistance of high-profile guest vocalists. And she does this so effectively that she could leave jazz behind and pursue a successful career as a contemporary singer-songwriter. When she dips into a Latin bag, she can sing in Spanish or Portuguese, and plays Brazilian music with remarkable fluency. She shifts from traditional acoustic jazz to plugged-in commercial styles with equal ease. But perhaps her most daring declaration of self-sufficiency came with her 2017 project  Exposure , which found Spalding creating an entire album over the course of seventy-seven hours, and broadcasting the entire process over Facebook. She walked into a North Hollywood studio at 9 a.m. on September 12, 2017, with nothing prepared, and during the next three days managed to compose, arrange, and record ten tracks. 
 If the essence of jazz is a trust in the powers of spontaneity, Spalding clearly lives up to the most extreme demands of the tradition. Sometimes it seems as if she has more interest in the process than the commercial product—an endearing quality in an age when musicians are encouraged to brand and commoditize everything they touch. When she finally released  Exposure  as an album, three months after she streamed the sessions, she only allowed 7,777 copies to be made—and got enough pre-orders to sell out even before  she had completed the recording. “It was a moment in time,” she explained to her fans on a YouTube video. “So if you get one, you get one; if you don’t, you don’t.” 6  A few months later, Spalding had already moved on to another unusual project—releasing twelve tracks over the course of twelve days, each song linked to a different part of the body and the entire process inspired by the artist’s growing interest in healing and well-being broadly defined. In a announcement on her website, Spalding explained that “I’ve been moving further and further away from a ‘musician’ kind of identity.” 7 
 This attitude might seem to undermine Spalding’s mass-market appeal, but if anything the opposite has happened. Almost from the start of her career, she has enjoyed widespread acceptance and acclaim from both within and outside the jazz world. When she took home the Grammy for Best New Artist in 2011, many industry pros were dumbfounded—after all, the other nominees included Drake and Justin Bieber. But in subsequent years, she continued to thrive in unexpected settings, which include everything from the Academy Awards ceremonies to guest stints on records with Bruno Mars and Janelle Monáe. Yet she is just as likely to show up in a deep in-the-tradition jazz setting alongside saxophonists Wayne Shorter or Joe Lovano. Few artists have covered more ground than Esperanza Spalding, or done more to bring jazz to new audiences. Yet few musicians are less predictable—as might be expected from an artist who, when asked to name her influences and heroes, will list such diverse names as Ornette Coleman, Madonna, Ron Carter, Milton Nascimento, and Joni Mitchell. Her ongoing evolution as a jazz artist is likely to be fascinating, but will almost certainly extend into unexpected terrain. 
 As the case of Esperanza Spalding makes clear, the jazz ethos not only can adapt to the new platforms and intermediaries transforming the music world, but can even turn them into part of the process of improvisation. In truth, the shift from physical albums to digital music has not been without its costs, and many artists (including jazz performers) have seen their income decline as a result. But new technology also offers—and has always offered—support for creative expression. Over the long run, jazz has proven its adaptability, not only surviving new waves of change and disruption, but putting them to use. 
 Just look at the music’s timeline. It can hardly be a coincidence that jazz first emerged shortly after the rise of the record business: in a previous era, improvisations could hardly have been preserved, let alone packaged and put up for sale in the marketplace. By serving as lasting repositories of this  spontaneous music, recordings helped propel the jazz idiom into the global marketplace. Each subsequent decade saw jazz invigorated by other emerging technologies. When new microphones were introduced in the late 1920s, jazz artists were the first to grasp how they allowed for a more nuanced and even whispery vocal delivery. Singing would never be the same again after this intervention. When radio and live broadcasting took off in the 1930s, jazz bandleaders were among the first to understand their potential for bringing the energy of live performance to listeners in their homes. The Swing Era was the inevitable result. When new instruments were invented over the course of the century—vibraphone, electric guitar, Hammond organ, etc.—the jazz community embraced them when most others saw them as mere novelties or useless gadgets. And in many instances, the jazz musicians were the actual innovators who introduced breakthrough technologies. Jazz composer Raymond Scott laid the foundation for the music synthesizer at his Manhattan Research operation, established in 1946. Around that same time, Bing Crosby provided financial support for Ampex, the company the revolutionized high-fidelity audio with its introduction of magnetic tape recording systems. Guitarist Les Paul got involved in everything from instrument design to multitrack recording, and his impact as an inventor even surpasses his considerable influence as a performer. There isn’t a recording studio anywhere in the world that doesn’t draw on techniques, from overdubbing to sound manipulation effects, that originated as his homegrown experiments. And in the 1980s, trombonist George Lewis developed his Voyager software, a system that allowed flesh-and-blood improvisers to engage in a dialogue with a “computer-driven, interactive ‘virtual improvising orchestra’ ”—thus anticipating much of the current research into AI-driven music. 8  Everywhere you look, the history of jazz overlaps, and in many cases propels, the history of modern music technology. 
 This ingenuity is part of the essence of jazz. Just as the first jazz musicians took the instruments and songs of nineteenth-century marching bands and dance ensembles and put them to bold, unanticipated uses, so has each subsequent generation of improvisers seized on whatever was new and exciting and repurposed it in surprising new ways. Over the course of decades, jazz has proven itself as the style that can absorb all other styles. By the same token, it is the technique that can assimilate other techniques—even those that seem hostile to its loose-and-easy attitudes. 
 Many see the emerging music technologies and platforms of a digital age as undermining the most essential elements of the jazz idiom. Can jazz survive,  they ask, in a musical culture increasingly shaped by algorithms and artificial intelligence? Can it thrive in a music ecosystem defined by the corporate mandates of Google, Apple, and other Silicon Valley behemoths? They point to an unsettling shift in the ways new technologies impact music: not long ago, most of the research went into creating new tools that musicians could use, but in recent years, the most influential technologies have been those that use the musicians, turning them into tools themselves, mere “content providers” forced to serve other interests. Instead of disrupting the  sound  of music, these technologies tend to disrupt the  soundness  of the music profession—shaking up distribution, retailing, and marketing in ways that favor digital aggregators and corporate platforms rather than those who create our songs. Can this possibly be a hospitable environment for jazz, an idiom that seems almost the total antithesis of the robotic and algorithmic future many envision for music? 
 It may seem like an unequal battle, but I will still put my wager on the jazz musicians. The odds have always been against them, but if they somehow overcame poverty and discrimination and countless other forces of marginalization, they probably can deal with sax-playing robots or anything else the technocrats put in their way. In fact, they will almost certainly find a way of incorporating whatever is new and different into their own broadening musical perspectives. 
 This vitality and versatility testify not just to the resilience of the art form, but also to its emergence as a worldview that transcends notions of style or music genre. After more than a century of morphing and mixing, jazz is more defined today by its attitudes than specific musical ingredients. It isn’t built just on blues notes and syncopations, but erects its elaborate superstructures of sound on a different foundation—grounding them instead in a commitment to spontaneity, an openness to ongoing musical dialogue, a dedication to craft, a trust in the human element, a celebration of the creative process, and a confident willingness to probe the unknown. In our tech-driven future, these aspects of music can hardly become obsolete. In fact, they might be exactly what we need to grow and thrive. 
 